Dashrath Chand

Dasharath Chand (Nepali: दशरथ चन्द; 1903-25 January 1941) is martyr of Nepalese Democratic Movement and a politician of Nepal who was active in starting a political revolution in Nepal during Rana rule. He was born at Baskot of Baitadi district of Nepal in 1903 AD as a son of Sher Bahadur Deuba (Chand).

Contents

	1 Education
	2 Political career
	3 See also
	4 References

Education
He received his education at different places of Uttarakhand like Almora, Nainital, etc. Finally, he went to Banaras, where he completed an Intermediate education. In Banaras he worked for Kashi Nagari Pracharini Sabha

Political career
The Indian people were trying to free India from the British rule. He was impressed by the freedom movement of India and involved in that movement. At the same time he remembered the miserable condition of the general public of Nepal. The public were suffering from poverty, illiteracy and ignorance. They were being exploited by the ruling class who had no law to obey and who lived in luxury. Tyranny, debauchery, economic exploitation and religious persecution characterized Rana rule. This 104-years of Rana regime has been called as one of the darkest periods of Nepalese history.[1][2] Dasharath Chand could not resist protesting the rulers. He was determined to end the Rana rule. He began to write articles against the Ranas in the Janata published from Patna in India, under the pseudonym of Sewasingh.
Dasharath Chand met Tanka Prasad Acharya and Dharma Bhakta Mathema who were active in starting a political revolution in Nepal. A Political party called the Nepal Praja Parishad was organized in the presidency of Tanka Prasad Acharya in Nepal with the active participation of Dasharath Chand.[3] It became active and started distributing pamphlets explaining the arbitrary Rana rule. For about 4 months, the government did not know who were doing it. At last, a reward of Rs. 5000 was announced for the revelation of the secret. The reward tempted Ramji Joshi, a member of Praja Parishad and he disclosed the secret. So arresting the leaders was begun. Gangalal Shrestha and Dasharath Chand were arrested. In prison, they were given severe torture and pain. They were asked to beg pardon but they did not do so. At last, in 1941, January 25, Dasharath Chand and Gangalal were shot dead at Shobha Bhagawati.[4]

See also
	Martyrs of Nepal
	Gangalal Shrestha
	Dharma Bhakta Mathema
	Shukraraj Shastri
	Nepal Praja Parishad

References
	Martyrs of Nepal
	Dietrich, Angela (1996). "Buddhist Monks and Rana Rulers: A History of Persecution". Buddhist Himalaya: A Journal of Nagarjuna Institute of Exact Methods. Archived from the original on 1 October 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2013.
	Lal, C. K. (16 February 2001). "The Rana resonance". Nepali Times. Retrieved 17 September 2013.
	Yadav, Pitambar Lal (2053 B.S.). Nepal ko Rajnaitik Itihas. Benaras: Modern Deepak Press. p. 265. Check date values in: |year= (help)
	Yadav, Pitambar Lal (2053 B.S.). Nepal ko Rajnaitik Itihas. Benaras: Modern Deepak Press. p. 266. Check date values in: |year= (help)
