Harold Jensen Christopher

Born in Dwight, Illinois, 6 November 1919, Harold Jensen Christopher was commissioned ensign in the U.S. Naval Reserve 28 May 1941. He was a 1941 graduate of Northwestern University. His Application for Headstone or Marker, filled out by his mother spells his first name as Harald.

Contents

	1 Defending Pearl Harbor Against Air Attack
	2 Awarded the Navy Cross
	3 Honored by Ship Naming
	4 References

Defending Pearl Harbor Against Air Attack
After training at the Naval Air Station, San Pedro, California, reported for duty in USS Nevada (BB-36) on 5 August 1941. During the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, 7 December 1941, Christopher realized his services were not needed at his regular station, and upon his own initiative he joined the crew of the 5" broadside battery, effectively controlling his part of the battery until killed.

Awarded the Navy Cross
He was posthumously awarded the Navy Cross.
The President of the United States of America takes pride in presenting the Navy Cross (Posthumously) to Ensign Harold Jensen Christopher, United States Naval Reserve, for exceptional courage, presence of mind, and devotion to duty and disregard for his personal safety while serving on board the Battleship U.S.S. NEVADA (BB-36), during the Japanese attack on the United States Pacific Fleet in Pearl Harbor, Territory of Hawaii, on 7 December 1941. Ensign Christopher, realizing his services at his regular battle station on the U.S.S. NEVADA were not needed at the time, he, on his own initiative, assumed duties on the five-inch broadside battery and effectively controlled his part of that battery until killed by a bomb explosion. The conduct of Ensign Christopher throughout this action reflects great credit upon himself, and was in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service. He gallantly gave his life for his country.[1]

Honored by Ship Naming
The USS Christopher (DE-100) was named, in 1943, in honor of this Navy Cross recipient.

References
	"Harold Christopher findagrave.com memorial".
	Christopher
