John Edmondson (soldier)

John Hurst Edmondson, VC (8 October 1914 – 14 April 1941) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross, the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces.

Contents

	1 Early life
	2 Second World War
		2.1 Victoria Cross citation
	3 Legacy
	4 References
	5 External links

Early life
John Hurst Edmondson was born at Wagga Wagga, New South Wales. His parents moved to the Sydney suburb of Liverpool where he attended Austral Public School and Hurlstone Agricultural High School. He later became a farm worker.

Second World War
On 20 May 1940 Edmondson enlisted in the 2/17th Battalion[1] after serving with the 4th Militia Battalion since March 1939. He was promoted to corporal. After training at Ingleburn and Bathurst, his battalion embarked for the Middle East on 19 October 1940 as reinforcements for the 9th Division. After desert training, his division relieved the 6th Australian Division at Marsa Brega in Cyrenaica on 9 March 1941. On 31 March, the German forces under the command of General Erwin Rommel mounted an attack on the Australian and British positions, forcing them to retreat. The 9th Division took up new positions outside the port of Tobruk and on 11 April, the now famous siege began.
Victoria Cross citation
The announcement and accompanying citation for the decoration was published in supplement to the London Gazette on 1 July 1941, reading:[2]
An hour later, 200 German infantrymen attacked the post, forcing the Australians to withdraw, and established a bridgehead in the outer defensive line. However, the fierceness of the platoon's defence pressured Rommel into diverting troops from his main attack. The attack failed, with the German tanks being mauled and forced to retreat with heavy casualties.
Corporal John Edmondson died of his wounds and is buried in the Tobruk war cemetery.[3] He was the first Australian to receive the Victoria Cross in the war. Edmondson's VC was presented to his mother by the Governor-General on 27 September 1941. In 1969, she presented her son's medals and some of his personal belongings to the Australian War Memorial, where they still are on display.[4]

Legacy
His name is still honoured by: the John Edmondson VC Rest Area at Roses Lagoon on the Remembrance Driveway from Sydney to Canberra; John Edmondson VC Memorial RSL Club, Liverpool, NSW; a plaque in the Walk of Honour in Baylis Street, in his birthplace of Wagga Wagga, NSW; the school hall in his former school, Hurlstone Agricultural High School, is named after him; a high school in the Horningsea Park district in NSW is named after him; the Sydney suburb of Edmondson Park, and Edmondson Street in the Sydney suburb of North Ryde, are named in his honour. Edmondson St in Campbell situated in Canberra, within 400m of the War Memorial is also named in his honour. Freemasons' Lodge Victoria Cross No. 928 of the United Grand Lodge of New South Wales and Australian Capital Territory (UGLNSWACT) which meets in Fairfield, NSW, was formed in honour of Cpl J H Edmondson, who was posted to Holsworthy Army Barracks, and who was an attending member of Liverpool Lodge. The Edmondson VC Club at ARTC Kapooka, an outer suburb of Wagga Wagga, is also named in his honour.

References
	"World War II Nominal Roll – Edmondson, John Hurst". Retrieved 2 August 2008.
	"No. 35207". The London Gazette (Supplement). 29 December 1944. pp. 3807–3808.
	"Commonwealth War Graves Commission – Edmondson, John Hurst". Retrieved 2 August 2008.
	"Hall of Valour – Victoria Crosses at the Memorial". Retrieved 2 August 2008.

External links
	Corporal J.H. Edmondson in The Art of War exhibition at the UK National Archives
	A Mother Grieves for Death of VC Winner (letter from his mother, plus background details), australiansatwar.gov.au
	Ian Grant, 'Edmondson, John Hurst (1914–1941)', Australian Dictionary of Biography, Volume 14, Melbourne University Press, 1996, p.&nbsp;80.
