John Barneson

Captain John Barneson was one of the most important figures in commerce and development on the Pacific Coast of California. He was responsible for the first oil pipeline in the State of California and was the Founder of General Petroleum which he later sold to Standard Oil of New York. Captain Barneson was a Director and Vice President of Standard Oil after the merger.
Captain Barneson was also a pioneer in the use of oil as a fuel for ocean steamers. He was one of the most popular social and business figures in the early 1900s and helped transform the economy of California.
In his memoirs Herbert Hoover wrote:

Contents

	1 Career at sea
	2 Personal life
	3 Affiliations
	4 References

Career at sea
	Served as First officer of the bark "Wollahra" from 1880-1883
	Received his Captain's papers in 1883
	Commanded the English Clipper Ship "George Thompson" from 1885-1890
	Retired from the sea in 1890
	Entered the service of the U.S. Government at the outbreak of the Spanish–American War and commanded the USAT Arizona
	Appointed "Marine Superintendent" by the U.S. Government, in which he oversaw all vessels involved in the transportation of troops into the Pacific

Personal life
Captain Barneson was the son of James Barneson and Elizabeth Rose Bremner Barneson. He married Harriet Emily Harris in Sydney, Australia on January 8, 1886. They had four children; John Leslie Barneson, Muriel E. Barneson, Lionel T. Barneson and Harold James Barneson (b. 1896 Port, WA, d. 1945 Los Angeles, CA).
He received his education in the public schools of New South Wales.

Affiliations
	American Institute of Mining Engineers
	Panama Pacific Expedition Board Member
	General Petroleum Founder and Managing Director
	General Pipe Line Company Founder and President
	General Construction Company President
	Wabash Oil Company President
	Las Flores Land and Oil Company President
	Coalinga Kettlemen Oil Company Vice President
	Sauer Dough Oil Company Director
	Bankline Oil Company President
	Union Oil Company Director
	Union Provident Director
	San Vincent Land Company
	Santa Barbara Improvement Company
	Residential Development Company
	San Mateo Improvement Company
	San Mateo Hotel Company President
	Barneson-Hibberd Co-Founder
	Barneson-Hibberd Warehouse Company Co-Founder
	Macondray &amp; Company
	Tyee Whaling Company
	San Francisco Chamber of Commerce Director
	Seattle Yacht Club Member
	Northwest International Yachting Association Commodore 1893
	San Francisco Yacht Club Member
	St. Francis Yacht Club Member
	Pacific Union Club Member
	Union League Club Member
	Olympic Club Member
	Press Club Member
	Bohemian Club Member
	Commercial Club Member
	California Club of Los Angeles Member
	San Mateo Polo Club Vice President

References
	Press Reference Library, "Portraits and Biographies of Men of the West", by International News Service
	The Memoirs of Herbert Hoover, Years of Adventure 1874-1920
	From the Garage to the Boardroom, National Commission on Entrepreneurship
	Torrance Refinery
