John W. Donohue

John W. Donohue, AIA (1869–1941) was an American architect who was active in Western Massachusetts during the first half of the 20th century.

Contents

	1 Early life and architectural training
	2 Architectural practice
	3 Works include
	4 References

Early life and architectural training
Donohue was born in Springfield, Massachusetts in 1869. His father was associated with the engineering department of a local railroad and designed an office building for that railroad in Springfield. The young Donohue was educated in the local schools including Central High School.

Architectural practice
After working for a local firm Donohue was appointed architect for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Springfield MA, which at the time also included the Roman Catholic Diocese of Worcester, MA. In this capacity Donohoe would design over 100 churches, schools, hospitals and other buildings for Catholic Clients

Works include
Worcester Diocese:
	St. Bernard Church, Worcester, MA
	Blessed Sacrament Church, Worcester, MA
	St. Casmir Church, Worcester, MA
	St. Peter Church, Worcester, MA
	St. Stephen Church, Worcester, MA
	St. Joseph Church (now Basilica), Webster, MA
	St. Mary Church, Uxbridge, MA
	Sacred Heart Church, Southbridge, MA
	Our Lady Immaculate Church, Athol, MA
Springfield Diocese:
	Our Lady of Hope Church, Springfield, MA
	Our Lady of the Sacred Heart Church, Springfield, MA
	Holy Family Church, Springfield, MA
	Immaculate Conception Church, West Springfield, MA
	Sacred Heart Church, Northampton, MA
	St. John Cantus Church Northampton, MA
	Corpus Christi Church, Housatonic, MA
	St. Teresa Church, West Springfield, MA (Mittineague)
	St. Thomas Church, West Springfield, MA (Mittineague)
	St. Mary Church, Pittsfield, MA
	Holy Cross Church, Holyoke, MA
	buildings for The College of Our Lady of the Elms (now Elms College), Chicopee, Massachusetts
	St. Anne Church, Chicopee, MA (fairview)
	St. Brigid Church Amherst, MA

References
	Kervick, Francis W. Architects in America of Catholic tradition. pp. 42–44.
