Karl Döhring

Karl Siegfried Döhring (often misspelled Döring; 14 August 1879, in Cologne – 1 June 1941, in Darmstadt; also writing under the pseudonym Ravi Ravendro) was a German architect, art historian and archaeologist. He lived mostly in Siam, now called Thailand.

Contents

	1 Life and work
	2 Historical and Cultural Background
	3 Significant Buildings
	4 Writings by Karl Döhring
	5 Literature about Karl Döhring
	6 References

Life and work
Döhring studied architecture in Berlin. He was fascinated by the rich art and architecture of Burma, and after completing his architectural studies in Berlin in 1905, he applied for a position with the Royal Siamese government in Bangkok. He began his work in July 1906 as an engineer with the Royal State Railways of Siam.
Between 1906 and 1912, he planned and supervised the construction of various railway buildings: including headquarters, crew accommodation, warehouses, a printing house and several train stations at Bangkok Noi (Thonburi), Phitsanulok, Phichit, Phichai (Tambon), Uttaradit and Sawankhalok. Besides his work for the Royal train, he also designed a number of homes and commercial buildings, some of which have not yet been identified.
In 1909, Döhring accepted a position as an architect and engineer with the Siamese Ministry of Interior. There, he made the acquaintance of many high-ranking officers of the ministry, and attracted the attention of members of the royal family who were working in the ministry - among them, Prince Damrong Rajanubhab, half brother of King Chulalongkorn and first interior minister of Thailand, and Dilok Nopparat, Prince of Siam. In his first two years at the Ministry, he was charged with designing and overseeing the construction of four major private buildings for members of the royal family. He built a residence for King Chulalongkorn in Phetchaburi, a palace for Prince Damrong, a palace for Prince Dilok and, for Queen Sukhumala Marasri, the sixth wife of Chulalongkorn, a residential building in the palace of her son, Prince Paribatra Sukhumbandhu (1881–1944), Field Marshal and Prince of Nakhon Sawan. He also was responsible for creating maps of Nakhon Pathom and Phetchaburi.
Unlike contemporary Western architects working in Siam at that time, Döhring's designs were not mere copies of European architectural style. Instead, he tried to combine Western and Thai architecture, adapting of old forms to new needs in a very personalized way. His buildings are individual, because they were "tailor-made" to the needs and expectations of his clients. The villa, for example, which he built for King Chulalongkorn in Phetchaburi, is a grand and imposing building. From a distance, it resembles the theaters of Oskar Kaufmann who was very popular in Germany at that time. The palace of Prince Damrong by contrast, is a work of simple elegance. For Prince Dilok, he used spare masculine lines. The residence of Queen Sukhumala Marasri captures the character of its female occupant - graceful and feminine.
The sudden death of his wife in 1911 was very hard on Döhring, and he detested the growing rivalry among foreigners in Siam. So he laid down his work for a year and traveled back to Germany. When he returned to Bangkok in 1913, the scope of his role with the Interior Ministry greatly expanded. In addition to his duties as an architect and engineer, he was tasked with archaeological excavations and assessments in some of the northern provinces of Siam. Some of the construction projects he drafted in those years were not realized - for example, the head office and hospital of the Royal Navy. Ultimately, the stress of overwork made Döhring seriously ill, and his doctors advised him to return to Germany.
After his health was restored, he hoped to return to Siam but the outbreak of World War I (1914–1918) made it impossible. After the war, he ended his career in architecture and worked as an art historian and archaeologist. He was a product designer, and also a translator of English and American literature. The depth of his knowledge and his passion for Siamese art, architecture and culture ensured that his books on Siam were well received in the West.
Döhring died 1 Jun 1941, at the age of 61, in a hospital in Darmstadt, Germany.

Historical and Cultural Background
During the reign of King Chulalongkorn (Rama V), the government of Siam was influenced and threatened by the major European colonial powers in Asia at the time. The king continued the reform policies initiated by his father which brought not only scientific, technical and economic progress to Siam, but also a more Western way of thinking and living.
A major part of his reform program was the modernization of the capital city, Bangkok. To impress Western visitors and dignitaries, the king had public buildings and royal palaces built in a style that combined historic European splendor with Asian architectural influences. For example, the Grand Palace in Bangkok - Chakri Maha Prasat - was built in the style of the Italian Renaissance, but at the request of Chulalongkorn a Siamese roof and Mondops were subsequently added. He believed that having Renaissance and Baroque style architecture would give Siam much needed recognition as a civilized nation among the European colonial powers - in effect persuading them to see Siam as an ally rather than a target for colonization. Chulalongkorn was interested in the European way of life - his living quarters in the Vimanmek Mansion in Bangkok District, Dusit, are a testament to that. His sons, who had been educated exclusively in Europe, also chose to build their palaces and villas in European style and followed the latest European fashions. In time, nobility, dignitaries and wealthy citizens began to imitate that royal example.

Significant Buildings
	Old Thonburi railway station, 1900:
	Phitsanulok railway station, 1906 to 1912:
	Villa for King Chulalongkorn in Phetchaburi, 1910 to 1916:
	Palace of Prince Damrong Rajanubhab, 1911:
	Palace of Prince Dilok Nopparat, 1909 to 1911
	Residence for Queen Sukhumala Marasri, begun between 1909 and 1911, presumed completed in 1913
	Bangkok Noi Railway Station
	Central Station of Phitsanulok
	Phra Ram Ratchaniwet Palace in Phetchaburi

Writings by Karl Döhring
	The Country and People of Siam. Reproduction of the English translation by White Lotus Press, Bangkok 1999, ISBN&nbsp;974-8434-87-7
	Buddhist temples in Siam. Bangkok (Siam), Asia Publishing House, ndJ. and Berlin, Association Scientific Publishers, 1920, 3 volumes (Volume 1 with texts and drawings of temples, Volume 2-3 with numerous illustrations in color and b / w). Reproduction Bangkok, White Lotus Press, 2000.
	Buddhist Stupa (Phra Chedi) Architecture of Thailand, White Lotus, Bangkok 2000, ISBN&nbsp;974-7534-39-8, reprint of The Prachedibau in Siam. In: Journal of Ethnology. 1912
	"Flucht aus Buddhas Gesetz", Copyright 1937 by Volksverband der Bücherfreunde, Wegweiser-Verlag G.m.b.H., Berlin.

Literature about Karl Döhring
	Krisana Daroonthanom: Das architektonische Werk des deutschen Architekten Karl Döhring in Thailand. Logos Verlag, Berlin 1998.
	Krisana Honguthen: Karl Dohring and His Architecture in Siam. In: Muang Boran Journal. Volume 25, No. 1, January / March 1999.

References
	Dinner speech by the Federal President Johannes Rau on Karl Doering
	Muang Boran Journal article&nbsp;: Karl Dohring and His Architecture in Siam
