Maria Baiulescu

Maria Baiulescu (August 1860 – June 1941) was a Romanian author, suffragist, women’s rights activist, Romanian nationalist, and feminist leader.

Life
She was born in Brasov in 1860. Her father, Bartolomeu Baiulescu, was a Romanian Orthodox Priest, and her mother, Elena Baiulescu, was the President of the National Committee of Romanian Women. Maria Baiulescu was able to get a good education growing up and graduated from the Girls French Institution. After graduating, she then started her writing career. She began as a translator but soon wrote for the Enciclopedia Romana. She also got to write plays for Societatea Pentru Crearea Unui Fond De Teatru Roman.
In her later life, Maria Baiulescu became a speaker and author for Asociatiunea Transilvana Pentru Literature Si Cultura Poporului Roman. From 1908 to 1935, she was the President of Reuniunea Femilior Romane Din Brasov. During her time serving as President, she also started another organization known as Uniunea Femeilor Romane. This organization helped women come together and work on common goals. She was also able to fund a girls' orphanage to help the girls learn how to accomplish daily tasks.
She wanted women to be at the front of the Romanian national movement. Maria Baiulescu believed that only women could preserve Romania's nation. She also improved the necessary care for young kids by giving them the basic hygiene that they needed. Maria wanted to keep the Romanian culture alive and keep distinctions between all other countries.
Maria Bailulescu fought for women to have equal rights as men. She founded an organization known as Asociatia pentru emanciparea civila si politica a femeilor romane. This association helped women practice their political rights.
She continued being involved and fighting for women's rights until she died on June 24, 1941.

Legacy
A technical college in Brasov is named in her honour.[1]

References
	"Admitere Colegiul Tehnic "maria Baiulescu" Brasov". www.admitereliceu.ro (in Romanian). Retrieved 25 April 2017.
Haan, Francisca de, et al. A Biographical Dictionary of Womens Movements and Feminisms: Central, Eastern, and South Eastern Europe, 19th and 20th Centuries. CEU Press, Central European University Press, 2008.
Smith, Bonnie G. The Oxford Encyclopedia of Women in World History. Oxford University Press, 2008.
